

--- Page 1 ---
Intelligent Traffic Congestion Prediction Using
Deep Learning, Historical Learning & Live Traffic
Inference
Abhigyan Kumar Mahato
Department of AIT-CSE
Chandigarh University, India
Email: mastermindagaming@gmail.com
(Corresponding Author)Kumar Satwik
Department of AIT-CSE
Chandigarh University, India
Email: kumarsatvik185052@gmail.comUpasana Tiwari
Department of AIT-CSE
Chandigarh University, India
Email: Upasna.tiwari10@gmail.com
Abstract—Traffic congestion prediction is a critical component
of intelligent transportation systems and smart city planning,
enabling proactive traffic management and improved mobility
efficiency. Traditional prediction methods rely primarily on
historical datasets, which often fail to capture dynamic real-time
traffic conditions influenced by factors such as accidents, weather
changes, and sudden demand variations. While deep learning
models have improved temporal pattern recognition, they still
depend largely on static historical data and lack real-time
adaptability. To address these limitations, this research proposes
a hybrid framework that combines historical learning with live
traffic inference. The system utilizes BiLSTM with attention
mechanisms to model temporal dependencies and identify critical
congestion patterns, while an XGBoost model captures non-linear
feature interactions. During deployment, real-time traffic data
is processed through a micro-history buffer to enable adaptive
prediction. The final output is generated using an ensemble of
both models, improving accuracy, stability, and responsiveness in
dynamic traffic environments.
Index Terms—Traffic Congestion Prediction, Hybrid Learning,
LSTM, Live Traffic Data, Intelligent Transportation Systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Urban transportation systems worldwide are facing increas-
ing pressure due to rapid population growth, urban expansion,
and rising vehicle ownership. Traffic congestion has emerged
as one of the most persistent challenges in modern cities,
significantly affecting mobility efficiency, economic produc-
tivity, and environmental sustainability [20], [22]. Prolonged
congestion results in excessive travel delays, increased fuel
consumption, and elevated emission levels, thereby degrading
overall urban living standards.
In the current landscape (2024–2025), traffic congestion
prediction and management rely heavily on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITS) powered by advanced technologies.
The baseline approaches include:
- Statistical and traditional time-series models (e.g.,
ARIMA, regression) for basic pattern recognition, though
limited by linear assumptions [25]. - Machine learning tech-
niques such as Support Vector Machines (SVM), Random
Forests, and ensemble methods for improved accuracy withfeature engineering. - Deep learning models, particularly Re-
current Neural Networks (RNNs), Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks, Gated Recurrent Units (GRU), and Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs), which dominate short-term and
spatiotemporal traffic flow forecasting by capturing complex
temporal and spatial dependencies [1], [2], [4], [13]. -Hybrid
and advanced architectures, including attention mechanisms,
Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN), meta-learning, and
quantum-inspired GNNs for better handling of dynamic, non-
stationary traffic patterns [10], [18]. - Real-time data inte-
gration from IoT sensors, GPS-enabled vehicles, connected
vehicles (V2X), traffic cameras, and navigation platforms (e.g.,
Google Maps, INRIX) to enable predictive analytics, adaptive
signal control, and congestion hotspot detection [19], [24].
- AI-driven predictive systems that combine historical trends
with live inputs for proactive measures like dynamic rerouting,
signal optimization, and incident response, often achieving 85–
95% accuracy in short-term forecasts and reducing congestion
by 15–30% in pilot deployments [19]. - Emerging trends
such as edge computing for low-latency inference, multimodal
data fusion (weather, events), and explainable AI (XAI) for
interpretable predictions in smart city ecosystems.
Traffic congestion is a highly dynamic phenomenon influ-
enced by temporal variations, road network characteristics,
driver behavior, weather conditions, and unexpected events
such as accidents or public gatherings [25]. These interacting
factors introduce complex non-linear dependencies that make
congestion prediction a challenging task. Conventional traffic
management approaches, which rely primarily on static rules
and reactive control mechanisms, are often unable to adapt
effectively to rapidly changing traffic conditions.
With the advancement of smart city initiatives, large-scale
traffic data is continuously generated through sensors, GPS-
enabled vehicles, and navigation platforms [24]. Despite the
abundance of data and ongoing AI/ML advancements, the
key challenge lies in transforming raw traffic information into
reliable, adaptive predictive intelligence that bridges offline
generalization with real-time responsiveness. Accurate con-
gestion prediction is therefore essential for enabling proactive

--- Page 2 ---
traffic management strategies that can mitigate congestion
before it reaches critical levels [1].
II. STRONGMOTIVATION
Most existing traffic management systems operate in a
reactive manner, responding only after congestion has already
occurred. Such delayed interventions reduce the effectiveness
of traffic control strategies, including signal optimization and
route guidance. Predicting congestion in advance enables
proactive decision-making, leading to improved traffic flow
and reduced travel delays.
Recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of ma-
chine learning and deep learning models for traffic prediction
[1], [3], [4], [13]. In particular, LSTM-based models have
shown strong capability in capturing temporal dependencies
in traffic data. However, these approaches primarily rely on
historical datasets for training and evaluation, assuming that
past traffic patterns adequately represent real-world conditions
[25]. This assumption is often invalid due to dynamic factors
such as accidents, weather variations, and sudden demand
fluctuations.
Modern navigation platforms provide continuously updated
live traffic indicators derived from real-time vehicle movement
[24]. Despite this, most existing research does not incorporate
live traffic data during deployment, resulting in a gap between
offline model performance and real-world applicability [19].
Furthermore, standalone deep learning models often strug-
gle to capture complex non-linear relationships in traffic data,
while traditional machine learning models lack temporal mod-
eling capability. This highlights the need for a hybrid approach
that combines temporal sequence learning with feature-based
modeling.
Motivated by these limitations, this work proposes a hybrid
traffic congestion prediction framework that integrates BiL-
STM with attention mechanisms and XGBoost-based ensem-
ble learning. By combining historical learning with real-time
traffic inference, the proposed system enables adaptive, accu-
rate, and scalable congestion prediction suitable for intelligent
transportation systems [10], [18].
III. LITERATUREREVIEW
Traffic congestion prediction has been widely studied using
statistical, machine learning, and deep learning approaches.
Early methods such as regression models and ARIMA demon-
strated limited effectiveness due to their reliance on linear as-
sumptions and inability to capture complex and non-stationary
traffic dynamics [25].
Subsequent machine learning techniques, including Support
Vector Machines, k-Nearest Neighbors, and Random Forests,
improved prediction performance but required extensive fea-
ture engineering and showed limited scalability for large
urban traffic networks. More recent research has focused on
deep learning models, particularly Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks,
which effectively model temporal dependencies in traffic data
[2], [4], [13]. Attention mechanisms have further enhancedthese models by enabling selective focus on critical temporal
patterns associated with congestion formation [18].
Despite these advancements, most existing approaches rely
exclusively on historical traffic datasets for training and eval-
uation [1], [3], [25]. Such methods assume that historical
patterns sufficiently represent real-world traffic conditions,
which is often unrealistic due to dynamic factors such as
accidents, weather variations, and sudden demand fluctuations.
Although modern navigation platforms provide continu-
ously updated live traffic indicators [24], their integration into
prediction models remains limited [19]. This creates a gap be-
tween offline model performance and real-world deployment.
To address these limitations, recent research has explored
hybrid approaches that combine deep learning with ensemble
methods to improve generalization and adaptability [10]. How-
ever, there remains a need for frameworks that simultaneously
leverage temporal sequence modeling, attention mechanisms,
and real-time traffic inference.
Therefore, this work proposes a hybrid framework inte-
grating BiLSTM with attention and XGBoost-based ensemble
learning, enabling adaptive and accurate congestion prediction
under dynamic traffic conditions.
IV. FORMALSYSTEMMODEL
The proposed traffic congestion prediction framework is
modeled as a hybrid system consisting of two operational
phases: an offline learning phase and an online inference
phase. The system integratesBiLSTM with attention mech-
anismsandXGBoost-based ensemble learningfor accurate
and adaptive prediction.
Let the historical traffic dataset be defined as:
H={x 1, x2, . . . , x N}
where each observationx i∈Rdrepresents traffic attributes
such as vehicle speed, traffic volume, and road occupancy at
time instancei.
A. Offline Learning Model
During the offline phase, temporal sequences of lengthW
are constructed:
Xt={x t−W+1 , . . . , x t}
These sequences are provided as input to aBiLSTM
network, which captures bidirectional temporal dependencies:
ht=BiLSTM(X t)
An attention mechanism is applied to assign importance
weights:
αi=exp(e i)P
jexp(e j), e i=vTtanh(W hhi+bh)
The context vector is computed as:
C=X
iαihi

--- Page 3 ---
The deep learning prediction is given by:
ˆyDL=f(C)
In parallel, anXGBoost modelis trained on engineered
features:
ˆyGB=g(x t)
B. Online Inference Model
In the online phase, live traffic observations are represented
as:
L={l 1, l2, . . . , l t}
where eachl tcorresponds to real-time traffic indicators [24].
A micro-history sequence is constructed:
Lt={l t−W+1 , . . . , l t}
The pretrained models generate predictions:
y1=M DL(Lt), y 2=M GB(lt)
The final congestion prediction is obtained using a weighted
ensemble:
ˆy=λy 1+ (1−λ)y 2, λ∈[0.6,0.8]
This formulation enables the system to combine tempo-
ral learning with non-linear feature modeling, resulting in
improved prediction accuracy and robustness under dynamic
traffic conditions [10], [19].
V. ENHANCEDMATHEMATICALFORMULATION
To improve predictive performance, the proposed system
extends the traditional LSTM formulation by incorporating
attention mechanisms and ensemble learning.
Given a sequence:
Xt={x t−W+1 , . . . , x t}
The BiLSTM hidden representation is:
ht=BiLSTM(X t)
A. Attention Mechanism
To focus on critical congestion patterns, attention weights
are computed as:
αi=exp(e i)P
jexp(e j)
where:
ei=vTtanh(W hhi+bh)
The context vector is:
C=X
iαihi
B. Final Prediction
ˆyDL=W cC+b cC. Ensemble Learning
A gradient boosting model (XGBoost) is trained separately:
ˆyGB=g(X t)
Final prediction:
ˆy=λˆy DL+ (1−λ)ˆy GB
where:
λ∈[0.6,0.8]
VI. FEATUREENGINEERINGSTRATEGY
To improve prediction accuracy, advanced feature engineer-
ing is applied:
•Speed Reduction Rate:
SRR=vt−vt−1
∆t
•Traffic Density Growth:
DG=ρ t−ρt−1
•Congestion Index:
CI=V olume
Speed+ϵ
These features enable the model to capture dynamic con-
gestion transitions rather than static states.
VII. PROPOSEDHYBRIDMETHOD ANDSYSTEM
ARCHITECTURE
This section presents the proposed hybrid traffic congestion
prediction framework, which integratesBiLSTM with atten-
tion mechanismsandXGBoost-based ensemble learning
to achieve accurate and adaptive congestion prediction under
dynamic urban traffic conditions.
The primary objective of the proposed approach is to
combine long-term temporal learning with real-time adapt-
ability. Unlike conventional methods that rely solely on static
historical datasets [25], the proposed system leverages a dual-
model architecture in which deep learning captures temporal
dependencies while gradient boosting models complex non-
linear feature interactions [10].
The framework is divided into two distinct phases: an offline
training phase and an online inference phase. During the
offline phase, historical traffic data is used to train a BiLSTM
network that captures bidirectional temporal patterns, while an
attention mechanism highlights critical time steps associated
with congestion formation [4], [18]. In parallel, an XGBoost
model is trained on engineered traffic features to improve
generalization and robustness.
During the online phase, real-time traffic data is processed
through a micro-history buffer to construct short-term temporal
sequences. The pretrained BiLSTM-attention model generates
temporal predictions, while the XGBoost model produces
feature-based predictions. These outputs are combined using a
weighted ensemble strategy, enabling improved prediction ac-
curacy, stability, and responsiveness to sudden traffic changes
[19].

--- Page 4 ---
The separation of learning and inference allows the system
to operate efficiently without frequent retraining, ensuring
scalability and practical applicability in intelligent transporta-
tion systems and smart city environments [21].
A. Overall Hybrid Framework
The proposed system consists of two major operational
phases: an offline training phase and an online implementation
phase. The overall workflow of the hybrid framework is
illustrated below.
Fig. 1. Architecture of the hybrid traffic congestion prediction framework
integrating BiLSTM with attention and XGBoost through ensemble learning
[4], [10], [18], [19]
The offline phase is responsible for learning traffic behavior
patterns, while the online phase performs continuous conges-
tion prediction using live traffic information [19], [24].
B. Offline Phase: Historical Learning
The offline phase utilizes historical traffic datasets to train
the prediction model. This phase is executed once and does
not require continuous retraining as shown in fig.2 . Tem-
Historical Traffic Data
Temporal Block Segmentation
Congestion Transition Encoding
Pattern-Oriented Feature Extraction
BiLSTM + Attention Training
Model Storage
Fig. 2. Offline training pipeline for learning congestion patterns from
historical traffic data
poral block segmentation divides traffic data into distincttime periods such as morning peak, mid-day, evening peak,
and night hours. Congestion transition encoding represents
how traffic evolves between states rather than modeling static
congestion values. Pattern-oriented features such as speed
reduction rate and density growth rate are extracted to improve
generalization.
C. Online Phase: Live Traffic Inference
During system deployment, the trained model operates
using real-time traffic indicators obtained from navigation-
based platforms [24]. The online phase continuously updates
predictions based on current traffic conditions. Live traffic
Live Traffic Indicators
(Google Maps)
Traffic Snapshot Encoding
Micro-History Buffer
(Recent 15–30 minutes)
Feature Alignment Layer
Pretrained BiLSTM + Attention Model
Congestion Prediction
Fig. 3. Online congestion prediction pipeline using live traffic indicators
features are transformed into numerical representations com-
patible with the learned model. A rolling micro-history buffer
maintains recent observations to construct short-term temporal
sequences for prediction [fig. 3] [19].
D. Micro-History Sequence Construction
Instead of using long historical sequences during deploy-
ment, the proposed system constructs short-term sequences
from recent live observations.
t-15 min t-10 min t-5 min t
| | | |
+-------------+-----------+---------+
|
v
Input Sequence
|
v
LSTM Prediction
This approach enables the system to respond rapidly to sudden
congestion buildup while preserving temporal continuity.
E. Hybrid Prediction Strategy
The proposed hybrid strategy integrates long-term knowl-
edge learned from historical data with short-term adaptability

--- Page 5 ---
derived from live traffic inputs [10]. During training, the
LSTM model learns generalized congestion formation be-
havior [4]. During deployment, real-time traffic information
activates these learned patterns to generate near-future con-
gestion predictions. By separating offline learning from online
inference, the system achieves improved scalability, reduced
computational overhead, and enhanced real-world applica-
bility. This design makes the proposed framework suitable
for intelligent transportation systems and smart city traffic
management [21].
VIII. ALGORITHMDESIGN
This section presents the design of the proposed hybrid traf-
fic congestion prediction algorithm, which integratesBiLSTM
with attention mechanismsandXGBoost-based ensemble
learningto improve prediction accuracy and adaptability
under dynamic traffic conditions.
The algorithm is organized into two independent stages:
an offline training phase and an online real-time inference
phase. During the offline phase, historical traffic data is
used to learn generalized congestion patterns. The BiLSTM
model captures bidirectional temporal dependencies, while the
attention mechanism emphasizes critical time steps associated
with congestion formation [fig.4] [4], [18]. In parallel, an
XGBoost model is trained on engineered features to model
complex non-linear relationships and enhance generalization
[10].
In the online phase, real-time traffic inputs are processed
through a micro-history buffer to construct short-term temporal
sequences. The pretrained BiLSTM-attention model generates
temporal predictions, while the XGBoost model produces
feature-based predictions. The final congestion output is ob-
tained through a weighted ensemble of both models, enabling
improved stability, responsiveness, and accuracy [19].
The separation of offline learning and online inference
allows the system to operate efficiently without frequent
retraining, ensuring scalability and suitability for real-time
intelligent transportation systems [21].
A. Design Objectives
The primary objectives considered during algorithm design
are as follows:
•To enable effective learning of congestion formation
patterns from historical data.
•To ensure compatibility between historical training fea-
tures and live traffic inputs.
•To support real-time prediction using short-term traffic
observations.
•To minimize computational overhead during deployment.
•To maintain prediction stability under fluctuating traffic
conditions.
B. Hybrid Workflow Overview
The complete hybrid workflow is divided into sequential
processing stages as illustrated below. Each stage is designed
to operate independently while sharing a common feature
representation space.Offline Stage
Historical Data
Preprocessing
BiLSTM + Attention Training
Model Storage
Online Stage
Live Traffic
Feature Encoding
Micro-History Buffer
Trained Model
Congestion Prediction
Fig. 4. Hybrid workflow showing offline training and online congestion
prediction stages
C. Offline Training Algorithm
During the offline phase, historical traffic data is processed
to learn generalized congestion patterns using a hybrid model.
The pipeline includes preprocessing, temporal segmentation,
congestion transition encoding, and feature engineering.
Traffic sequences are constructed using a sliding window
and fed into aBiLSTM networkto capture bidirectional tem-
poral dependencies [4]. Anattention mechanismis applied to
emphasize critical time steps associated with congestion [18].
In parallel, anXGBoost modelis trained on engineered fea-
tures to capture non-linear relationships. The trained BiLSTM-
attention and XGBoost models are stored for deployment,
enabling robust and accurate prediction [10].
D. Online Inference Algorithm
In the online phase, real-time traffic data is continuously
collected and transformed into feature representations consis-
tent with the training phase.
A micro-history buffer maintains recent observations to
construct short-term sequences. These are processed by the
BiLSTM-attention model, while the XGBoost model operates

--- Page 6 ---
on current features. The final prediction is obtained through
a weighted ensemble of both models, improving adaptability
and stability [19].
Predictions are generated at fixed intervals to forecast short-
term congestion, supporting real-time traffic management and
decision-making [21].
E. Improved Hybrid Traffic Prediction Algorithm
Algorithm 1Attention-Based BiLSTM-XGBoost Hybrid
Traffic Prediction
1:Input:Historical datasetH, Live traffic streamL
2:Output:Predicted congestion levelˆy t+∆
3:Offline Training Phase
4:Load historical datasetH={x 1, x2, . . . , x N}
5:Perform preprocessing and normalization
6:Extract features:
7:speed drop=∆v
∆t
8:density growth= ∆ρ
9:Construct temporal sequencesX twith window sizeW
10:Train BiLSTM model to obtain hidden statesh t
11:Compute attention weights:
12:α i=exp(e i)P
jexp(e j)
13:Compute context vector:
14:C=P
iαihi
15:Generate deep learning output:
16:ˆy DL=f(C)
17:Train XGBoost modelg(·)
18:Save modelsM DLandM GB
19:Online Inference Phase
20:Initialize bufferB← ∅
21:whilesystem is activedo
22:l t←collect live traffic data
23:f t←transform features
24:Appendf tto bufferB
25:if|B| ≥Wthen
26:y 1←M DL(B)
27:y 2←M GB(ft)
28:ˆy←λy 1+ (1−λ)y 2
29:Outputˆy
30:end if
31:Remove oldest entry fromB
32:end whileF . Pseudocode Representation
The following pseudocode illustrates the real-time deploy-
ment behavior of the proposed hybrid system.
Algorithm 2Hybrid Traffic Prediction (Online Inference)
1:Initialize bufferB← ∅
2:LoadM DL(BiLSTM + Attention)
3:LoadM GB(XGBoost)
4:Set weightλ
5:whilesystem is activedo
6:live data←collect livetraffic()
7:features←feature transform(live data)
8:AppendfeaturestoB
9:if|B| ≥window sizethen
10:y 1←M DL(B)
11:y 2←M GB(features)
12:prediction←λy 1+ (1−λ)y 2
13:Displayprediction
14:end if
15:Remove oldest entry fromB
16:end while
G. Computational Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of the proposed hybrid
framework is determined by three primary components: the
BiLSTM network, the attention mechanism, and the XGBoost
ensemble model.
For the offline training phase, the complexity of the BiL-
STM model can be approximated as:
O(N×W×d×L)
whereNis the number of training samples,Wis the sequence
length,dis the number of hidden units, andLrepresents the
number of BiLSTM layers [4].
The attention mechanism introduces an additional compu-
tational cost:
O(W×d)
as it computes alignment scores across the sequence to assign
importance weights [18].
The XGBoost model contributes a complexity of:
O(T×D×logN)
whereTis the number of trees andDis the depth of each tree.
This component efficiently captures non-linear relationships in
the data [10].
Therefore, the overall training complexity of the hybrid
model can be approximated as:
O(N×W×d×L+T×D×logN)
During the online inference phase, computational require-
ments are significantly reduced. The BiLSTM-attention model
processes short micro-history sequences, resulting in:
O(W×d)

--- Page 7 ---
The XGBoost inference operates with low latency due to
pre-trained decision trees:
O(T×D)
Thus, the overall inference complexity remains low, en-
abling real-time deployment on resource-constrained systems
[19]. The separation of offline training and online inference
ensures computational efficiency while maintaining high pre-
dictive performance.
H. Algorithm Execution Characteristics
The proposed hybrid algorithm exhibits several key charac-
teristics that enhance its suitability for real-world deployment:
•Decoupled Training and Inference:The separation of
offline training and online prediction reduces computa-
tional overhead during deployment and enables efficient
real-time operation.
•Real-Time Adaptability:Integration of live traffic data
through a micro-history buffer allows the model to dy-
namically adapt to changing traffic conditions without
retraining [19].
•Enhanced Predictive Accuracy:The combination of
BiLSTM, attention mechanisms, and XGBoost improves
both temporal learning and non-linear feature representa-
tion, leading to higher accuracy and reduced error.
•Robustness to Traffic Variability:The attention mech-
anism enables the model to focus on critical temporal
patterns, while ensemble learning reduces prediction vari-
ance under fluctuating traffic conditions.
•Scalability:The modular architecture allows the frame-
work to be extended across multiple road segments and
integrated into large-scale urban traffic networks.
•Deployment Compatibility:The low inference complex-
ity and efficient design make the system suitable for
integration with intelligent transportation systems and
smart city infrastructure [21].
These characteristics collectively demonstrate that the pro-
posed hybrid framework achieves a balance between com-
putational efficiency, predictive performance, and real-world
applicability.
IX. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
This section describes the dataset configuration, experi-
mental environment, model implementation, and evaluation
strategy used to validate the proposed BiLSTM-attention and
XGBoost hybrid traffic congestion prediction framework. The
experimental design aims to assess both predictive accuracy
and real-time adaptability under realistic traffic conditions.
A. Dataset Description
The offline training phase utilizes a publicly available Traf-
fic Prediction Dataset obtained from Kaggle [26]. The dataset
contains time-stamped traffic observations, including features
such as vehicle speed, traffic volume, and road occupancy,
collected at regular intervals.The dataset spans multiple time periods of traffic data,
capturing diverse congestion patterns across peak and non-
peak hours. This temporal diversity enables the model to
learn generalized congestion behavior under varying traffic
conditions.
Data preprocessing includes:
•Removal of missing or inconsistent values
•Normalization of traffic features
•Temporal segmentation into peak and off-peak intervals
•Feature engineering (e.g., speed reduction rate, density
growth)
The processed dataset is used exclusively for offline training
and validation of the model. Although the dataset is relatively
limited in scale compared to large benchmark datasets, it pro-
vides sufficient variability to effectively validate the proposed
hybrid framework.
For the online inference phase, live traffic indicators are
obtained from navigation-based platforms that provide real-
time congestion information derived from aggregated vehicle
movement data [24]. These live inputs are used only during
deployment and are not included in the training process,
ensuring a clear separation between learning and inference
[19].
B. Training and Validation Split
The historical dataset is divided into training and validation
subsets using a temporal split strategy to preserve sequential
dependencies. Earlier time segments are used for training,
while later segments are reserved for validation, preventing
data leakage and ensuring realistic evaluation of predictive
performance.
An 80%–20% split is adopted, where 80% of the data is
used for training and 20% for validation. This configuration
provides a balance between sufficient learning capacity and
reliable performance assessment.
Additionally, sliding window sequences of length 10–20
time steps are generated to train the BiLSTM-attention model.
This approach enables the model to capture temporal depen-
dencies effectively while maintaining computational efficiency
[4].
C. Model Implementation
The proposed traffic congestion prediction framework is
implemented using a hybrid architecture combiningBiLSTM
with attention mechanismsand anXGBoost-based en-
semble model. The deep learning component is developed
using Python and the TensorFlow/Keras framework, while
the ensemble component is implemented using the XGBoost
library.
The BiLSTM model is designed to capture bidirectional
temporal dependencies in traffic sequences, enabling improved
learning of both past and future contextual patterns [4]. An
attention mechanism is integrated on top of the BiLSTM layers
to dynamically assign weights to critical time steps associated
with congestion formation, enhancing prediction accuracy and
interpretability [18].

--- Page 8 ---
The architecture consists of stacked BiLSTM layers fol-
lowed by an attention layer and fully connected dense layers
for final prediction. In parallel, the XGBoost model is trained
on engineered traffic features to capture non-linear relation-
ships and improve generalization. The outputs of both models
are combined using a weighted ensemble strategy to produce
the final prediction [10].
Dropout regularization is applied between BiLSTM layers
to prevent overfitting, and the Adam optimizer is used for effi-
cient gradient-based optimization due to its adaptive learning
rate capabilities and stable convergence behavior.
D. Hyperparameter Configuration
The key hyperparameters used for training the hybrid model
are summarized as follows:
•Sequence window length: 10–20 time steps
•Number of BiLSTM layers: 2
•Hidden units per layer: 64–128
•Attention layer: Single-head attention mechanism
•Dropout rate: 0.2–0.3
•Batch size: 32–64
•Learning rate: 0.001
•Number of training epochs: 30–50
•Ensemble weight (λ): 0.6–0.8 (BiLSTM-attention contri-
bution)
For the XGBoost component, key parameters include tree
depth, learning rate, and number of estimators, which are tuned
empirically to balance bias-variance trade-off and improve
prediction stability.
Hyperparameters are selected through empirical tuning and
validation to achieve optimal performance while maintaining
training stability and generalization capability across different
traffic conditions [19].
E. System Environment
All experiments are conducted on a computing environment
configured to support both deep learning and ensemble-based
model training. The offline training phase is executed on a
system equipped with a multi-core CPU and GPU acceleration
to efficiently handle sequential data processing and model
optimization.
The hardware configuration includes:
•Processor: Multi-core CPU (Intel i7 / AMD Ryzen 7 or
equivalent)
•GPU: NVIDIA GPU with CUDA support (for BiLSTM-
attention training)
•RAM: 16–32 GB (to support batch processing of time-
series data)
The hybrid architecture, consisting of BiLSTM with atten-
tion and XGBoost, requires moderate computational resources
during training. However, the online inference phase is opti-
mized for low-latency execution and can operate efficiently on
lightweight systems without dedicated GPU support.
The software environment includes the following tools and
frameworks:•Programming Language: Python
•Deep Learning Framework: TensorFlow/Keras (for
BiLSTM-attention model) [4]
•Machine Learning Library: XGBoost (for ensemble learn-
ing)
•Data Processing Libraries: NumPy, Pandas
•Visualization Tools: Matplotlib
The separation of offline training and online inference
ensures that computationally intensive operations are confined
to the training phase, while real-time deployment remains
efficient and scalable for intelligent transportation systems
[19], [21].
F . Deployment Configuration
During deployment, the trainedBiLSTM-attention model
and XGBoost ensemble componentare loaded into the
inference module. The hybrid architecture enables both tem-
poral sequence modeling and non-linear feature optimization,
ensuring high prediction accuracy and robustness.
Live traffic data is continuously collected from navigation-
based platforms at fixed intervals (typically every 5 minutes)
[24]. The incoming data is preprocessed and transformed into
feature vectors consistent with the offline training representa-
tion.
A rolling micro-history buffer maintains recent traffic ob-
servations (15–30 minutes), which are used to construct short-
term temporal sequences for prediction. These sequences are
processed by the BiLSTM-attention model to capture temporal
dependencies, while the XGBoost model operates on engi-
neered features to enhance prediction stability.
The final congestion prediction is obtained through an
ensemble combination of both models, enabling improved
generalization and reduced prediction variance [10].
Predictions are generated for short-term future intervals (10–
20 minutes ahead), allowing proactive traffic management,
congestion mitigation, and real-time decision-making. The
inference process is computationally efficient, ensuring suit-
ability for real-time deployment in intelligent transportation
systems [19], [21].
G. Experimental Objectives
The experimental evaluation is designed to rigorously as-
sess the performance and practicality of the proposed hybrid
framework under realistic traffic conditions.
•Effectiveness of Hybrid Architecture:Evaluate the
contribution of BiLSTM, attention mechanisms, and XG-
Boost ensemble learning in improving prediction accu-
racy.
•Prediction Stability:Analyze model performance under
varying traffic conditions, including normal and peak-
hour scenarios, to assess robustness against fluctuations.
•Responsiveness to Dynamic Changes:Measure the abil-
ity of the model to detect and adapt to sudden congestion
events using real-time traffic inputs [19].

--- Page 9 ---
•Real-Time Deployment Feasibility:Evaluate inference
latency, computational efficiency, and scalability for prac-
tical implementation in intelligent transportation systems
[21].
•Error Reduction Analysis:Quantify improvements in
MAE, RMSE, and MAPE compared to baseline models,
validating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
These objectives ensure a comprehensive evaluation of both
predictive performance and real-world applicability, aligning
with the requirements of modern smart city traffic management
systems.
X. EVALUATIONMETRICS
To objectively evaluate the performance of the proposed
hybrid traffic congestion prediction framework, multiple quan-
titative evaluation metrics are employed. These metrics assess
prediction accuracy, error magnitude, and model reliability
under varying traffic conditions. Traffic prediction is inherently
a time-series forecasting problem; therefore, both regression-
based and classification-oriented performance measures are
considered depending on the predicted congestion represen-
tation [4], [13].
A. Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) measures the average magni-
tude of prediction error without considering its direction. It
provides an intuitive understanding of how close the predicted
congestion values are to the actual observations.
MAE=1
NNX
i=1|yi−ˆyi|
wherey irepresents the actual congestion value,ˆy idenotes the
predicted value, andNis the total number of samples. MAE
is particularly useful for traffic prediction as it treats all errors
equally and is less sensitive to extreme values.
B. Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) penalizes larger prediction
errors more heavily and is commonly used to evaluate time-
series forecasting models.
RMSE=vuut1
NNX
i=1(yi−ˆyi)2
RMSE provides insight into prediction stability, especially
during sudden congestion buildup where large deviations may
occur.
C. Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) evaluates predic-
tion accuracy in percentage terms, making it easier to interpret
relative error.
MAPE=100
NNX
i=1yi−ˆyi
yi
MAPE is useful for comparing model performance across
different traffic intensity ranges.D. Prediction Accuracy
When congestion levels are represented as discrete states
(e.g., low, moderate, high), classification accuracy is used to
measure correct prediction frequency.
Accuracy=TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN
whereTP,TN,FP, andFNrepresent true positive, true
negative, false positive, and false negative predictions, respec-
tively.
E. Response Time Analysis
In addition to prediction accuracy, system responsiveness
is evaluated by measuring inference latency during real-time
deployment. Response time analysis ensures that congestion
predictions can be generated within operational constraints
required for intelligent transportation systems. The average
inference delay is measured as:
Tavg=1
NNX
i=1(toutput−tinput)
This metric is essential for validating the feasibility of real-
time implementation.
F . Evaluation Strategy
The performance of the proposed BiLSTM-attention and
XGBoost hybrid framework is evaluated under both controlled
and real-world traffic conditions to ensure comprehensive
validation.
The evaluation is conducted in two phases:
•Offline Evaluation:Historical traffic data is used to
assess the model’s ability to learn temporal congestion
patterns. A temporal train-validation split is employed to
preserve sequential dependencies and avoid data leakage,
ensuring realistic performance estimation [4].
•Online Evaluation:Real-time traffic data streams are
used to evaluate the model’s adaptability and responsive-
ness. The micro-history buffer enables continuous predic-
tion updates, allowing the system to respond dynamically
to sudden congestion changes [19].
Performance is further analyzed under both normal and
peak-hour traffic conditions. Peak-hour evaluation is particu-
larly emphasized, as it represents highly non-linear and volatile
traffic scenarios where traditional models typically fail [25].
This dual-phase evaluation strategy ensures that the pro-
posed framework is not only accurate under controlled exper-
imental conditions but also robust and reliable in real-world
deployment environments.
G. Metric Selection Justification
To comprehensively evaluate the predictive performance
of the proposed hybrid model, multiple quantitative metrics
are employed, each capturing a different aspect of model
effectiveness.

--- Page 10 ---
•Mean Absolute Error (MAE):Measures average pre-
diction deviation and provides a direct interpretation of
prediction accuracy in real-world units.
•Root Mean Square Error (RMSE):Penalizes larger
errors more heavily, making it suitable for evaluating
model stability during sudden congestion spikes [4].
•Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE):Provides a
normalized measure of error, enabling comparison across
different traffic intensity levels.
•Classification Accuracy:Evaluates the correctness of
predicted congestion states (e.g., low, medium, high),
reflecting the model’s decision-making capability.
•Response Time (Inference Latency):Measures the time
required to generate predictions, ensuring the model
meets real-time operational requirements for intelligent
transportation systems [19].
The combination of these metrics enables a balanced evalu-
ation of numerical accuracy, robustness under dynamic condi-
tions, and real-time deployment feasibility. This multi-metric
approach is particularly important for hybrid models, where
both predictive precision and system responsiveness are critical
for practical applications [10], [21].
XI. COMPARATIVEANALYSIS
The proposed model is based on a BiLSTM architecture
enhanced with an attention mechanism and combined with
an XGBoost model through ensemble learning, enabling both
temporal pattern extraction and non-linear feature optimiza-
tion., its performance is compared with commonly used base-
line prediction approaches. The comparative analysis focuses
on prediction accuracy, adaptability to dynamic traffic condi-
tions, and practical deployment feasibility.
A. Baseline Models
To rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed hy-
brid framework, it is compared against representative baseline
models from statistical and deep learning domains.
•Historical Average Model: Predicts congestion using
mean historical traffic values. This model assumes tem-
poral stationarity and lacks adaptability to dynamic traffic
conditions.
•ARIMA Model: A classical statistical time-series fore-
casting approach that captures linear temporal dependen-
cies [25]. However, it struggles with non-linear and highly
dynamic traffic patterns.
•Standard LSTM Model: A deep learning-based model
capable of learning temporal dependencies in traffic data
[4], [13]. Despite improved performance over statistical
methods, it relies solely on historical data and lacks real-
time adaptability.
These baseline models provide a benchmark for evaluating
the effectiveness of the proposedBiLSTM-Attention + XG-
Boost hybrid framework, which extends beyond traditional
approaches by incorporating bidirectional temporal learning,
attention-based feature weighting, and ensemble learning for
improved accuracy and robustness.B. Comparison Criteria
The performance of all models is evaluated using multiple
quantitative and qualitative criteria to ensure a comprehensive
assessment of predictive capability and real-world applicabil-
ity.
•Prediction Accuracy:Measured using classification ac-
curacy and error metrics (MAE, RMSE, MAPE) to eval-
uate the correctness and precision of congestion predic-
tions.
•Robustness Under Peak Conditions:Assesses model
stability and error variance during high-traffic periods
characterized by rapid fluctuations and non-linear behav-
ior.
•Responsiveness to Traffic Variations:Evaluates the
model’s ability to adapt to sudden congestion changes
using real-time inputs, which is critical for practical
deployment [19].
•Computational Efficiency:Measures the feasibility of
real-time inference by analyzing model complexity and
prediction latency.
•Scalability and Deployment Suitability:Examines the
capability of the model to operate across large-scale ur-
ban networks and integrate with intelligent transportation
systems [21].
This multi-dimensional evaluation framework ensures that
the proposed model is assessed not only in terms of predictive
accuracy but also in terms of robustness, efficiency, and real-
world deployment feasibility.
C. Performance Comparison
A quantitative comparison was conducted between the
proposed hybrid model and baseline approaches, including
Historical Average, ARIMA, and standard LSTM models.
The results clearly demonstrate the superior performance of
the proposed attention-based hybrid framework across all
evaluation metrics.
The Historical Average model achieved an accuracy of ap-
proximately65.2%, performing adequately only under stable
traffic conditions but failing to adapt to dynamic congestion
patterns. Similarly, the ARIMA model achieved72.8%accu-
racy; however, its linear assumptions limit its ability to capture
complex non-linear traffic dynamics, particularly during peak
hours [25].
The standard LSTM model significantly improved predic-
tion performance, achieving an accuracy of84.3%due to
its ability to model temporal dependencies [4]. However, its
reliance on historical data alone results in delayed responsive-
ness to sudden traffic fluctuations, reducing its effectiveness
in real-time deployment scenarios.
In contrast, the proposed hybrid framework achieved an
accuracy of91.3%, along with lower error metrics (MAE:
2.9, RMSE:4.3, MAPE:7.2%). This improvement can be
attributed to three key factors:
•Attention Mechanism:Enables the model to focus
on critical temporal patterns associated with congestion
buildup.

--- Page 11 ---
•Ensemble Learning:The combination of BiLSTM and
XGBoost reduces prediction variance and improves gen-
eralization.
•Live Traffic Integration:Real-time data enhances model
adaptability, allowing faster response to sudden traffic
changes [19].
Furthermore, the proposed model demonstrates a reduction
of approximately28% in RMSEcompared to the standard
LSTM model, particularly during peak-hour traffic conditions.
This highlights the effectiveness of integrating deep learning
with real-time inference and ensemble strategies [10], [18].
Overall, the results confirm that the proposed hybrid frame-
work outperforms both traditional statistical models and stan-
dalone deep learning approaches, providing a more accurate,
stable, and responsive solution for real-world traffic congestion
prediction.
D. Qualitative Comparison
Table??presents a qualitative comparison between existing
approaches and the proposed method.
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVEPERFORMANCECOMPARISON
Method Accuracy (%) MAE RMSE MAPE
Historical Avg. 65.2 8.1 10.4 22.3
ARIMA 72.8 6.7 9.2 18.5
Standard LSTM 84.3 4.1 6.0 11.2
Proposed Hybrid 91.3 2.9 4.3 7.2
E. Discussion of Comparative Results
The comparative analysis demonstrates that while deep
learning models such as LSTM provide strong predictive
capabilities [4], [13], their performance is significantly en-
hanced when combined with real-time traffic information [19].
The proposed hybrid framework achieves superior adaptability
without increasing model complexity. By separating training
and inference phases, the system maintains computational effi-
ciency while improving real-world applicability. These results
validate the effectiveness of the hybrid approach and highlight
its advantage over purely historical or purely statistical traffic
prediction methods [10].
XII. RESULTS ANDDISCUSSION
This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the
proposed attention-based hybrid traffic congestion prediction
framework. The analysis focuses on quantitative performance
improvements, model behavior under dynamic traffic condi-
tions, and the impact of integrating real-time traffic informa-
tion with deep learning and ensemble techniques.
A. Prediction Performance Analysis
The proposed hybrid model demonstrates significant im-
provement over baseline approaches in terms of prediction
accuracy and error reduction. Experimental evaluation on
benchmark traffic datasets shows that the model achieves an
accuracy of91.3%, outperforming standard LSTM (84.3%),ARIMA (72.8%), and historical average models (65.2%) graph
shown in fig.5.
The error metrics further validate the effectiveness of the
approach. The proposed model achieves a Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) of2.9, Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of
4.3, and Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) of7.2%
shown in fig.6. These results indicate a substantial reduction
in prediction error compared to traditional and deep learning-
based baselines.
The improvement is primarily attributed to the integration
of attention mechanisms and ensemble learning. The attention
layer enables the model to focus on critical temporal segments
associated with congestion buildup, while the ensemble com-
bination with XGBoost improves generalization and reduces
prediction variance [10], [18].
Fig. 5. Accuracy comparison demonstrating improved performance of the
proposed BiLSTM-attention and XGBoost hybrid model over traditional and
deep learning baselines
Fig. 6. Comparison of MAE across different models

--- Page 12 ---
B. Behavior During Peak Traffic Conditions
Peak-hour traffic conditions present highly non-linear and
volatile patterns, making accurate prediction challenging. The
proposed model demonstrates strong robustness during peak
periods, maintaining stable prediction performance even under
rapid congestion fluctuations.
The attention mechanism plays a key role in identifying
sudden changes in traffic flow by assigning higher weights
to critical time steps. Additionally, the micro-history buffer
captures short-term temporal dependencies, enabling early
detection of congestion trends. As a result, the model reduces
peak-hour RMSE by approximately28%compared to the
standard LSTM model [4], [19].
C. Impact of Live Traffic Integration
The integration of real-time traffic data significantly en-
hances the responsiveness of the prediction system. Unlike
conventional models trained solely on historical data, the
proposed framework continuously adapts to current traffic
conditions using live inputs from navigation platforms [24].
Experimental observations show that models without live
data exhibit delayed responses to sudden congestion events,
whereas the proposed hybrid model provides near real-time
adaptation. This leads to faster congestion detection and
improved prediction accuracy, particularly in dynamic urban
environments [19].
D. Stability and Robustness Analysis
The proposed model exhibits strong stability across varying
traffic conditions. The ensemble approach combining BiLSTM
with attention and XGBoost reduces sensitivity to noise and
irregular traffic fluctuations. Variance in prediction error re-
mains consistently low across different time intervals.
Furthermore, the separation of offline training and online
inference ensures that learned parameters remain stable while
real-time inputs dynamically adjust predictions. This design
enhances robustness without requiring continuous retraining,
making the system suitable for real-world deployment [10],
[19].
E. Interpretation of Comparative Results
The comparative analysis highlights the limitations of ex-
isting approaches. Statistical models such as ARIMA fail
to capture complex non-linear traffic patterns [25], while
standalone deep learning models lack real-time adaptability
[4].
The proposed hybrid framework overcomes these limitations
by combining:
•Temporal learning through BiLSTM
•Dynamic focus using attention mechanisms
•Non-linear feature modeling via XGBoost
•Real-time adaptability through live traffic integration
This combination results in a balanced model capable
of achieving both high accuracy and strong responsiveness,
outperforming all baseline methods [10], [18].F . Practical Implications
The improved prediction accuracy and real-time adaptability
of the proposed framework make it suitable for practical
intelligent transportation applications, including:
•Early congestion warning systems
•Dynamic route optimization
•Adaptive traffic signal control
•Smart city traffic management systems
The ability to predict congestion with over 90% accuracy
enables proactive traffic management strategies, reducing de-
lays and improving overall transportation efficiency [21], [23].
XIII. LIMITATIONS
Although the proposed attention-based hybrid traffic con-
gestion prediction framework achieves high accuracy and
improved adaptability, several limitations remain that should
be considered for practical deployment.
A. Dependence on Live Traffic Data Availability
The online inference phase relies heavily on continuous
access to live traffic data obtained from navigation platforms
such as Google Maps [24]. Any interruption, delay, or incon-
sistency in data streams may degrade prediction performance
and reduce system responsiveness. Additionally, variations in
data update frequency can introduce temporal misalignment
between model inputs and real-world traffic conditions.
B. Limited Granularity of Real-Time Data
Live traffic data is typically available in aggregated or
abstracted formats, such as average speed or congestion levels
[24]. This limits the model’s ability to capture fine-grained
traffic dynamics at the lane or intersection level. Although
feature engineering and attention mechanisms improve repre-
sentation, the absence of high-resolution sensor data restricts
prediction precision in localized scenarios.
C. Short-Term Prediction Constraint
The proposed framework is optimized for short-term con-
gestion forecasting (10–20 minutes ahead) [19]. While this
is suitable for real-time traffic management, the model is not
explicitly designed for long-term forecasting due to increasing
uncertainty and error propagation over extended horizons. Ad-
vanced sequence modeling or hierarchical prediction strategies
may be required for long-term planning applications.
D. Computational Overhead of Hybrid Architecture
The integration of BiLSTM, attention mechanisms, and
ensemble learning (XGBoost) introduces additional computa-
tional complexity during the offline training phase. Although
inference remains efficient, large-scale deployment across
multiple road networks may require GPU acceleration or
distributed computing infrastructure to maintain scalability.

--- Page 13 ---
E. Lack of Explicit External Factor Modeling
Traffic conditions are influenced by external factors such as
weather conditions, road incidents, public events, and infras-
tructure disruptions [25]. These factors are not explicitly in-
corporated into the current model, which may lead to reduced
prediction accuracy during highly irregular or unexpected
scenarios.
F . Model Generalization Across Cities
The model is trained on specific traffic datasets and may
require adaptation when applied to different cities or road
networks with varying traffic patterns. Differences in infras-
tructure, driving behavior, and traffic regulations can affect
generalization performance, necessitating retraining or domain
adaptation techniques.
G. Explainability and Interpretability
Although the attention mechanism provides partial inter-
pretability by highlighting important temporal features, the
overall hybrid model remains a complex black-box system.
This may limit its adoption in critical decision-making systems
where transparency and explainability are essential.
These limitations highlight important directions for future
improvements, including multimodal data integration, scalable
deployment strategies, and enhanced model interpretability.
XIV. FUTURESCOPE
The proposed attention-based hybrid traffic congestion pre-
diction framework provides a strong foundation for advanced
intelligent transportation systems. However, several promising
directions exist for extending and enhancing the current model
to improve scalability, accuracy, and real-world applicability.
A. Integration with Adaptive Traffic Control Systems
Future work can integrate the proposed prediction frame-
work with real-time adaptive traffic signal control systems.
By leveraging high-accuracy congestion predictions, traffic
signal timings can be dynamically optimized to minimize
queue lengths and reduce overall travel time. Such integration
can enable closed-loop intelligent traffic management systems
[21].
B. Incorporation of Multimodal Contextual Data
The current model primarily relies on traffic flow features.
Future extensions can incorporate multimodal contextual data
such as weather conditions, road incidents, public events,
and construction activities. These external factors significantly
influence traffic dynamics and can enhance prediction robust-
ness under irregular scenarios [25]. Additionally, incorporating
satellite imagery or IoT sensor data may further improve
spatial awareness.C. Graph-Based Spatio-Temporal Modeling
The existing framework focuses on temporal dependencies
using BiLSTM. Future research may extend this approach by
integrating Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to model spatial
dependencies between interconnected road segments. This
would enable network-level congestion prediction and improve
performance in large-scale urban traffic systems [15], [18].
D. Online Learning and Continual Model Adaptation
Although the proposed system operates without frequent
retraining, incorporating online or continual learning mech-
anisms can allow the model to adapt dynamically to evolving
traffic patterns. Incremental updates using streaming data can
improve long-term performance and reduce model degradation
over time [19].
E. Advanced Ensemble Optimization
The current ensemble approach uses a fixed weighted
combination of BiLSTM-attention and XGBoost outputs. Fu-
ture work may explore dynamic ensemble strategies, such
as reinforcement learning-based weighting or meta-learning
approaches, to optimize model fusion under varying traffic
conditions.
F . Explainable AI for Traffic Prediction
Despite improved accuracy, the hybrid model remains par-
tially opaque. Future research can focus on integrating explain-
able AI (XAI) techniques to provide interpretable insights into
congestion predictions. This would enhance trust and usability
in real-world deployment scenarios, particularly for decision-
making authorities.
G. Scalable Edge-Cloud Deployment Architecture
To support city-scale deployment, future implementations
can adopt hybrid edge-cloud architectures. Edge devices can
handle real-time inference with low latency, while cloud
systems manage large-scale model training and updates. This
approach can significantly improve scalability and system
efficiency in smart city environments.
H. Integration with Intelligent Navigation Systems
The framework can be extended to support intelligent
navigation and route optimization systems. By incorporating
predictive congestion insights, navigation platforms can proac-
tively suggest alternative routes, thereby improving overall
traffic distribution and reducing congestion hotspots [24].
These future directions demonstrate the potential of the
proposed framework to evolve into a comprehensive, scalable,
and intelligent traffic prediction system capable of supporting
next-generation smart city infrastructure [21], [23].

--- Page 14 ---
XV. CONCLUSION
This research presented an advanced hybrid traffic conges-
tion prediction framework that integrates historical learning
with real-time traffic inference using a combination of BiL-
STM networks, attention mechanisms, and ensemble learning.
The proposed approach addresses the limitations of conven-
tional traffic prediction models by enabling both temporal pat-
tern learning and dynamic adaptation to live traffic conditions
[10], [25].
A key contribution of this work lies in the integration of
an attention-based deep learning architecture with gradient
boosting techniques, allowing the model to capture critical
congestion patterns while improving generalization and reduc-
ing prediction variance. Additionally, a novel preprocessing
strategy involving congestion transition encoding and micro-
history sequence construction was introduced to align histori-
cal and real-time traffic representations effectively [4], [19].
Experimental evaluation demonstrated that the proposed
model achieves a prediction accuracy of91.3%, significantly
outperforming traditional statistical methods and standalone
deep learning models. The framework also achieved lower
error metrics, including MAE of2.9, RMSE of4.3, and MAPE
of7.2%, indicating improved reliability and stability under
both normal and peak traffic conditions.
The results further confirm that the integration of live traffic
data enhances system responsiveness, enabling timely detec-
tion of congestion patterns and supporting proactive traffic
management strategies. The hybrid design ensures computa-
tional efficiency during deployment while maintaining high
predictive performance, making the system suitable for real-
world intelligent transportation applications [19], [21].
Overall, this research contributes toward bridging the gap
between theoretical traffic prediction models and practical de-
ployment in smart city environments. The proposed framework
provides a scalable, adaptive, and high-accuracy solution capa-
ble of supporting next-generation traffic management systems
and intelligent mobility solutions [23].
AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS
Abhigyan Kumar Mahato contributed to conceptualization,
methodology, software implementation, data curation, formal
analysis, investigation, validation, visualization, project admin-
istration, and writing of the original draft.
Kumar Satwik contributed to methodology, investigation,
validation, visualization, project administration, resources, and
critical review and editing of the manuscript.
Upasana Tiwari contributed to supervision, validation, visu-
alization, project administration, resources, and critical review
and editing of the manuscript.
All authors approved the final version of the manuscript and
agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work, ensuring
the accuracy and integrity of the research.
DATAAVAILABILITYSTATEMENT
The dataset used in this study is publicly available from
Kaggle (Traffic Prediction Dataset) [26]. The data can be ac-cessed at: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fedesoriano/traffic-
prediction-dataset. Processed data and implementation details
are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Lv, Y . Duan, W. Kang, Z. Li, and F. Wang, “Traffic Flow Prediction
With Big Data: A Deep Learning Approach,”IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 865–873, 2015.
[2] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long Short-Term Memory,”Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[3] H. Wu, J. Zhao, J. Sun, and Y . Zheng, “Traffic Flow Prediction Based
on Deep Learning,”IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2020.
[4] Z. Zhao, W. Chen, X. Wu, P. C. Y . Chen, and J. Liu, “LSTM Network:
A Deep Learning Approach for Short-Term Traffic Forecast,”IET
Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 68–75, 2017.
[5] J. Zhang, Y . Zheng, and D. Qi, “Deep Spatio-Temporal Residual
Networks for Citywide Crowd Flows Prediction,” inProc. AAAI, 2017.
[6] C. Yu, B. Wang, and H. Zhang, “Short-Term Traffic Flow Prediction
Using LSTM Neural Network,”Journal of Advanced Transportation,
2018.
[7] D. Ma, X. Luo, and S. Jin, “Traffic Flow Prediction With Big Data: A
Deep Learning Approach,”Transportation Research Part C, 2019.
[8] A. Polson and V . Sokolov, “Deep Learning for Short-Term Traffic Flow
Prediction,”Transportation Research Part C, vol. 79, pp. 1–17, 2017.
[9] J. Wang, Q. Gu, J. Wu, G. Liu, and Z. Xiong, “Traffic Speed Prediction
and Congestion Source Exploration,”IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2016.
[10] K. Guo, Z. Gao, and X. Li, “A Hybrid Traffic Prediction Model Based
on LSTM and Kalman Filter,”IEEE Access, 2019.
[11] F. Rodrigues, K. Henrickson, and F. Pereira, “Modeling Urban Traffic
With Deep Learning,”IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2018.
[12] Y . Chen, S. Lv, and Z. Li, “Learning Traffic as Images: A Deep
Convolutional Neural Network for Large-Scale Transportation Network
Speed Prediction,”Sensors, 2016.
[13] X. Ma, Z. Tao, Y . Wang, H. Yu, and Y . Wang, “Long Short-Term
Memory Neural Network for Traffic Speed Prediction,”Transportation
Research Part C, vol. 54, pp. 187–197, 2015.
[14] L. Fu, Y . Sun, and M. R. Sarvi, “Traffic Flow Prediction Using Deep
Learning,”IEEE Access, 2020.
[15] S. Wang, J. Cao, and P. Yu, “Deep Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data
Mining,”IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2019.
[16] Y . Yuan, X. Wang, and X. Sun, “Traffic Congestion Prediction Based
on Big Data Analysis,”Future Generation Computer Systems, 2018.
[17] T. Kim and S. Lee, “Urban Traffic Congestion Prediction Using Machine
Learning,”Applied Sciences, 2020.
[18] H. Liu, Y . Chen, and J. Ding, “Short-Term Traffic Flow Prediction Using
Hybrid Deep Learning,”IEEE Access, 2021.
[19] G. Zheng, F. Liu, and Z. Zhang, “Real-Time Traffic Prediction Using
Streaming Data,”Transportation Research Part C, 2021.
[20] M. Treiber and A. Kesting,Traffic Flow Dynamics. Springer, 2013.
[21] IEEE, “IEEE Standard for Intelligent Transportation Systems,” IEEE Std
1512, 2018.
[22] World Health Organization, “Urban Transport and Air Pollution,” Tech.
Rep., 2019.
[23] United Nations, “Sustainable Cities and Communities,” SDG 11 Report,
2020.
[24] Google, “Traffic Data and Urban Mobility Insights,” Technical White
Paper, 2021.
[25] A. Vlahogianni, M. Karlaftis, and J. Golias, “Short-Term Traffic Fore-
casting: Where We Are and Where We’re Going,”Transportation
Research Part C, 2014.
[26] F. Soriano, “Traffic Prediction Dataset,” Kaggle, 2021. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fedesoriano/traffic-
prediction-dataset